# Indicator Species Analysis

March 2, 2025 - Shreya

## Purpose
The purpose of this session is to perform indicator species analysis using the phyloseq object developed in P08 and an updated metadata category that combines the age group (Young Adult, Middle Age, and Elderly) with each cancer stage.

## Materials
1. R Studio
2. Phyloseq object from P08

## Methods
1. Load the following libraries: tidyverse, phyloseq, microbiome, ggVennDiagram) from the phyloseq code.
2. Extract the sample metadata from gc_genus_RA and create a new variable that combines cancer stage and age group (Stage_Age).
3. Run indicator species analyis using the multipatt function with respect to the combined cancer stage and age group (Stage_Age).
4. Summarize results and create create a taxonomy table, filtering for p < 0.05 and stat >= 0.7 to retain signifigant and relatively strong indicator taxa. 
5. View and export the final table as a .csv.

## Code

[ISA R](../Rscripts/Aim3/ISA.R)


## Output Files

[isa_table_0.7.csv](../Rscripts/Aim3/isa_table07.csv)

## Results

Initially, we observed that when stat is greater or equal to 0.8, ISA identifies one ASV associated with an uncultured Polyangiaceae species belonging to the Sandaracinaceae family in elderly individuals experiencing intestinal metaplasia (the second stage of gastric cancer progression). There is little informatiton available about this species; during team meeting, it was suggested we refer to it at the genus level instead. 

Based on the above result, we edited the code above to adjust our stat filtering. When stat is greater or equal to 0.7, ISA identifies an additional ASV associated with the Clostridiaceae family/Sarcina genus (but the species is unidentified) in middle-aged individuals experiencing full-fledged gastric cancer. This paper highlights https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3193598/.

## Discussion

It seems that older individuals (middle aged and elderly) have distinct microbial taxa present in unique cancer stages relative to younger stages, although few signifigant taxa were identified (including after a more lenient cutoff of stat was set) and are not well-represented within existing human microbiome literature. It will be interesting to see whether core microbiome analysis highlights a core signature present in older adults relative to younger.

## Future Directions

Perfore core microbiome analysis to identify whether middle aged or elderly adults have distinct microbial signatures that are consistent across different cancer communities.

Begin PICRUSt2 analysis and examine whether these signifigant microbes are related to any pathway changes.
